1. ﻿ the   project   gutenberg   ebook   of   war   and   peace   this   ebook   is   for   the   use   of   anyone   anywhere   in   the   united   states   and   most   other   parts   of   the   world   at   no   cost   and   with   almost   no   restrictions   whatsoever   you   may   copy   it

2.   give   it

3.   away   or   reuse   it

4.   under   the   terms   of   the   project   gutenberg   license   included   with   this   ebook   or   online   at   if   you   are   not   located   in   the   united   states   you   will   have   to   check   the   laws   of   the   country   where   you   are   located   before   using   this   ebook   title   war   and   peace   author   graf   leo   tolstoy   translator   aylmer   maude   louise   maude   release   date   april   ebook   most   recently   updated   june   language   english   credits   an   anonymous   volunteer   and   david   widger   book   one   chapter   i   “ well   prince   so   genoa   and   lucca   are   now   just   family   estates   of   the   buonapartes   but   i   warn   you   if   you   don ’ t   tell   me

5.   that   this   means   war   if   you   still   try   to   defend   the   infamies   and   horrors   perpetrated   by   that   antichrist — i   really   believe   he   is   antichrist — i   will   have   nothing   more   to   do

6.   with   you   and   you   are   no   longer   my   friend

7.   no   longer   my   ‘ faithful   slave

8. ’

9.   as   you   call   yourself   but   how   do

10.   you   do

11.   i   see   i   have   frightened   you — sit   down   and   tell   me

12.   all   the   news ”   it

13.   was   in   july   and   the   speaker   was   the   wellknown   anna   pávlovna

14.  

15. schérer

16.   maid   of   honor   and   favorite   of   the   empress   márya   fëdorovna   with   these   words   she   greeted   prince   vasíli   kurágin   a   man   of   high   rank   and   importance   who   was   the   first   to   arrive   at   her   reception   anna   pávlovna

17.   had   had   a   cough   for   some   days   she   was   as   she   said   suffering   from   la   grippe   grippe   being   then   a   new   word   in   st   petersburg   used   only   by   the   elite   all   her   invitations   without   exception   written   in   french   and   delivered   by   a   scarletliveried   footman   that   morning   ran   as   follows   “ if   you   have   nothing   better   to   do

18.   count   or   prince   and   if   the   prospect   of   spending   an   evening   with   a   poor   invalid   is   not   too   terrible   i   shall   be   very   charmed   to   see   you   tonight   between   and   — annette   schérer ”   “ heavens   what   a   virulent   attack ”   replied   the   prince   not   in   the   least   disconcerted   by   this   reception   he   had   just   entered   wearing   an   embroidered   court   uniform   knee   breeches   and   shoes   and   had   stars   on   his   breast   and   a   serene   expression   on   his   flat   face   he   spoke   in   that   refined   french   in   which   our   grandfathers   not   only   spoke   but   thought   and   with   the   gentle   patronizing   intonation   natural   to   a   man   of   importance   who   had   grown   old   in   society   and   at   court   he   went   up   to   anna   pávlovna

19.   kissed   her   hand   presenting   to   her   his   bald   scented   and   shining   head   and   complacently   seated   himself   on   the   sofa   “ first   of   all   dear   friend

20.   tell   me

21.   how   you   are   set   your   friend

22. ’ s   mind   at   rest ”   said   he   without   altering   his   tone   beneath   the   politeness   and   affected   sympathy   of   which   indifference   and   even   irony   could   be   discerned   “

23. can

24.   one   be   well   while   suffering   morally   can

25.   one   be   calm   in   times   like   these   if   one   has   any   feeling ”   said   anna   pávlovna

26.  

27. “ you   are   staying   the   whole   evening   i   hope ”   “ and   the   fete   at   the   english   ambassador ’ s   today

28.   is   wednesday   i   must   put   in   an   appearance   there ”   said   the   prince   “ my   daughter   is   coming   for   me

29.   to   take   me

30.  

31. there ”   “ i   thought   today

32. ’ s   fete   had   been   canceled   i   confess   all   these   festivities   and   fireworks   are   becoming   wearisome ”   “ if   they   had   known   that   you   wished   it

33.   the   entertainment   would   have   been   put   off ”   said   the   prince   who   like   a   woundup   clock   by   force   of   habit   said   things   he   did   not   even   wish   to   be   believed   “ don ’ t   tease   well   and   what   has   been   decided   about   novosíltsev

34. ’ s   dispatch   you   know   everything ”   “ what   can

35.   one   say   about   it ”   replied   the   prince   in   a   cold   listless   tone   “ what   has   been   decided   they   have   decided   that   buonaparte   has   burnt   his   boats   and   i   believe   that   we   are   ready   to   burn   ours ”   prince   vasíli   always   spoke   languidly   like   an   actor   repeating   a   stale   part   anna   pávlovna

36.  

37. schérer

38.   on   the   contrary   despite   her   forty   years   overflowed   with   animation   and   impulsiveness   to   be   an   enthusiast   had   become   her   social   vocation   and   sometimes   even   when   she   did   not   feel   like   it

39.   she   became   enthusiastic   in   order   not   to   disappoint   the   expectations   of   those   who   knew   her   the   subdued   smile   which   though   it

40.   did   not   suit   her   faded   features   always   played   round   her   lips   expressed   as   in   a   spoiled   child   a   continual   consciousness   of   her   charming   defect   which   she   neither   wished   nor   could   nor   considered   it

41.   necessary   to   correct   in   the   midst   of   a   conversation

42.   on   political   matters   anna   pávlovna

43.   burst   out   “ oh   don ’ t   speak   to   me

44.   of   austria   perhaps   i   don ’ t   understand   things   but   austria   never   has   wished   and   does   not   wish   for   war   she   is   betraying   us   russia   alone   must   save   europe

45.   our   gracious   sovereign   recognizes   his   high   vocation   and   will   be   true   to   it

46.   that   is   the   one   thing   i   have   faith   in   our   good   and   wonderful   sovereign   has   to   perform   the   noblest   role   on   earth   and   he   is   so   virtuous   and   noble   that   god   will   not   forsake   him

47.   he   will   fulfill   his   vocation   and   crush   the   hydra   of   revolution   which   has   become   more   terrible   than   ever   in   the   person   of   this   murderer   and   villain   we   alone   must   avenge   the   blood   of   the   just   one   whom   i   ask   you   can

48.   we   rely   on   england   with   her   commercial   spirit   will   not   and   cannot   understand   the   emperor   alexander ’ s   loftiness   of   soul   she   has   refused   to   evacuate   malta   she   wanted   to   find   and   still   seeks   some   secret   motive   in   our   actions   what   answer   did   novosíltsev

49.   get   none   the   english   have   not   understood   and   cannot   understand   the   selfabnegation   of   our   emperor   who   wants   nothing   for   himself   but   only   desires   the   good   of   mankind   and   what   have   they   promised   nothing   and   what   little   they   have   promised   they   will   not   perform   prussia

50.   has   always   declared   that   buonaparte   is   invincible   and   that   all   europe

51.   is   powerless   before   him

52.   and   i   don ’ t   believe   a   word   that   hardenburg   says   or   haugwitz   either   this   famous   prussian   neutrality   is   just   a   trap   i   have   faith   only   in   god   and   the   lofty   destiny   of   our   adored   monarch   he   will   save   europe ”   she   suddenly   paused   smiling   at   her   own   impetuosity   “ i   think ”   said   the   prince   with   a   smile   “ that   if   you   had   been   sent   instead   of   our   dear   wintzingerode   you   would   have   captured   the   king   of   prussia

53. ’ s   consent   by   assault   you   are   so   eloquent   will   you   give   me

54.   a   cup   of   tea ”   “ in   a   moment   à   propos ”   she   added   becoming   calm   again   “ i   am   expecting   two   very   interesting   men   tonight   le   vicomte   de   mortemart   who   is   connected   with   the   montmorencys   through   the   rohans   one   of   the   best   french   families   he   is   one   of   the   genuine   émigrés   the   good   ones   and   also   the   abbé   morio   do

55.   you   know   that   profound   thinker   he   has   been   received   by   the   emperor   had   you   heard ”   “ i   shall   be   delighted   to   meet   them ”   said   the   prince   “ but   tell   me ”   he   added   with   studied   carelessness   as   if   it

56.   had   only   just   occurred   to   him

57.   though   the   question   he   was   about   to   ask   was   the   chief   motive   of   his   visit   “ is   it

58.   true   that   the   dowager   empress   wants   baron   funke   to   be   appointed   first   secretary   at   vienna   the   baron   by   all   accounts   is   a   poor   creature ”   prince   vasíli   wished   to   obtain   this   post   for   his   son   but   others   were   trying   through   the   dowager   empress   márya   fëdorovna   to   secure   it

59.   for   the   baron   anna   pávlovna

60.   almost   closed   her   eyes   to   indicate   that   neither   she   nor   anyone   else   had   a   right   to   criticize   what   the   empress   desired   or   was   pleased   with   “ baron   funke   has   been   recommended   to   the   dowager   empress   by   her   sister ”   was   all   she   said   in   a   dry   and   mournful   tone   as   she   named   the   empress   anna   pávlovna ’ s   face   suddenly   assumed   an   expression   of   profound   and   sincere   devotion   and   respect   mingled   with   sadness   and   this   occurred   every   time   she   mentioned   her   illustrious   patroness   she   added   that   her   majesty

61.   had   deigned   to   show   baron   funke   beaucoup   d ’ estime   and   again   her   face   clouded   over   with   sadness   the   prince   was   silent   and   looked   indifferent   but   with   the   womanly   and   courtierlike   quickness   and   tact   habitual   to   her   anna   pávlovna

62.   wished   both   to   rebuke   him

63.   for   daring   to   speak   as   he   had   done   of   a   man   recommended   to   the   empress   and   at   the   same   time   to   console   him

64.   so   she   said   “ now   about   your   family   do

65.   you   know   that   since   your   daughter   came   out   everyone   has   been   enraptured   by   her   they   say   she   is   amazingly   beautiful ”   the   prince   bowed   to   signify   his   respect   and   gratitude   “ i   often   think ”   she   continued   after   a   short   pause   drawing   nearer   to   the   prince   and   smiling   amiably   at   him

66.   as   if   to   show   that   political   and   social   topics   were   ended   and   the   time   had   come   for   intimate   conversation

67. —

68. “ i   often   think

69.   how   unfairly   sometimes   the   joys   of   life   are   distributed   why   has   fate   given   you   two   such   splendid   children   i   don ’ t   speak   of   anatole   your   youngest   i   don ’ t   like   him ”   she   added   in   a   tone   admitting   of   no   rejoinder   and   raising   her   eyebrows   “ two   such   charming   children   and   really   you   appreciate   them

70.   less   than   anyone   and   so   you   don ’ t   deserve   to   have   them ”   and   she   smiled   her   ecstatic   smile   “ i   can

71. ’ t   help   it ”   said   the   prince   “ lavater   would   have   said   i   lack   the   bump   of   paternity ”   “ don ’ t   joke   i   mean   to   have   a   serious   talk   with   you   do

72.   you   know   i   am   dissatisfied   with   your   younger   son   between   ourselves ”   and   her   face   assumed   its   melancholy   expression   “ he   was   mentioned   at   her   majesty

73. ’ s   and   you   were   pitied ”   the   prince   answered   nothing   but   she   looked   at   him

74.   significantly   awaiting   a   reply   he   frowned   “ what   would   you   have   me

75.   do ”   he   said   at   last   “ you   know   i   did   all   a   father   could   for   their   education   and   they   have   both   turned   out   fools   hippolyte   is   at   least   a   quiet   fool   but   anatole   is   an   active   one   that   is   the   only   difference   between   them ”   he   said   this   smiling   in   a   way   more   natural   and   animated   than   usual   so   that   the   wrinkles   round   his   mouth   very   clearly   revealed   something   unexpectedly   coarse   and   unpleasant   “ and   why   are   children   born   to   such   men   as   you   if   you   were   not   a   father   there

76.   would   be   nothing   i   could   reproach   you   with ”   said   anna   pávlovna

77.   looking   up   pensively   “ i   am   your   faithful   slave

78.   and   to   you   alone   i   can

